The greatest honor anyone can have
is to be called a servant
of the Most High God, Jehovah.
And as you’ve seen
from your deep study of God’s Word,
servants of Jehovah also have
distinct personality traits, or qualities,
that are called to mind
when their names are mentioned.
For example, what qualities, or traits,
do you think of
when we mention the following names?
Ruth, Gideon,
David, Martha
—yes, the name of a servant of Jehovah
can call to mind
certain qualities, certain traits,
that are worthy of imitation.
So, what will you be called?
As you begin your new assignment,
what quality, or trait, would you like
your fellow workers to think about
when your name is mentioned?
The Bible book of Proverbs provides
a very reachable goal in this regard.
Please open to Proverbs chapter 16,
and we’ll read together verse 21.
That’s Proverbs 16:21:
“The wise in heart
will be called understanding.”
What a worthy goal that is
—to be called a person of understanding!
Now, from your studies,
you know understanding
is the ability to put the facts together
—to grasp the full,
complete picture of a matter.
So how is understanding demonstrated?
Is it revealed in a test score?
Or is it revealed
by being the first to provide a solution
in a group setting or perhaps at a meeting?
Well, let’s keep reading verse 21:
“And the one kind in speech
adds persuasiveness.”
There’s how understanding is demonstrated:
in kind speech or, as the footnote indicates,
“appealing speech,” “sweetness of lips.”
So a person who’s called understanding
puts the facts together,
grasps the full picture
in order to find good in a matter.
And that is reflected through kind,
positive, persuasive speech.
Now, this is more than just being optimistic
or the power of positive thinking.
Understanding has a source.
Please turn to Proverbs,
this time chapter 9,
and we’ll read verse 10.
That’s Proverbs 9:10:
“The fear of Jehovah
is the beginning of wisdom,
and knowledge of the Most Holy One
is understanding.”
There is the Source
—“the Most Holy One,” Jehovah God.
He’s both the Source of understanding,
and he’s the supreme example
in how to use it.
Just think for a moment
of what happened after the tragic,
painful rebellion in the garden of Eden.
What did Jehovah do?
Immediately, he put the facts together;
he saw the complete picture.
And then he uttered the Edenic promise
—a positive promise—
that gives us hope,
even right after that painful tragedy.
And hundreds of years later
with the nation of Israel,
they would repeatedly abandon Jehovah.
What would he do?
He would hear their groanings,
he would hear their cries,
he would see their changed attitude,
and he would raise up judges
to save them time after time.
Yes, Jehovah God shows us
what real understanding is.
And because we trust in him,
we too can find the good,
speak and act kindly and positively.
And how refreshing it is
to see this in your class!
Your kind, positive speech and actions
with one another
and with those that you come in contact with
have been very refreshing to see.
It’s a result
of your deep trust in God’s Word
and your deep trust in Jehovah himself.
And your studies
have just further enhanced that
over these past few months.
In contrast, much of the world’s education
fosters critical thinking.
Note what The Watchtower  says about this:
“Do not be fooled by the mistaken notion
“that a cynical, critical,
pessimistic attitude
“is the same as intelligence.
Actually, negative thinking
demands little of the intellect.”
So, what a privilege to know,
as you dear students do,
what real understanding is!
It’s not just the ability
to identify what’s wrong with a situation.
It’s the ability
to identify how good can address it.
And this will encourage
your brothers and sisters.
One Bethel family member
observed understanding
in the assistant overseer of a department.
On one occasion, the department overseer
scheduled a meeting with several brothers
from other departments,
but he forgot to inform his assistant.
Then on the day of the meeting,
the overseer was away.
So several brothers arrived for a meeting
that the assistant knew nothing about.
What would he do?
It was observed
that he said a brief, silent prayer;
came out;
welcomed the group;
addressed the points for discussion;
and at the end said:
“Thank you brothers
for coming to this meeting
“and allowing me to fill in for the overseer.
And I’ll update him when he returns.”
He just covered for him
—beautiful example.
He knew this man
had shouldered responsibility for decades.
This was not his pattern.
So he just applied the good.
He showed understanding.
Now, realistically,
there will be days when it will be hard
to be known as a person of understanding.
What if, though,
there’s a prolonged period of time
where we’re finding it
difficult to find the good,
to speak and act kindly and positively?
Maybe our mate or a trusted friend
even speaks with us and says,
“Your kind, positive speech
and actions are changing.”
What can we do?
Well, each person and their relationship
with Jehovah is unique.
But let’s consider the example
of the writer of Psalm 73
and learn a valuable principle.
The writer of this inspired psalm
was struggling
with even whether or not to serve Jehovah.
Note the turmoil he’s in
at Psalm 73:14:
“And I was troubled all day long;
every morning I was chastised.”
Now, it can be difficult
to be known as a person of understanding
when we’re in this frame of mind.
In fact, in verse 22,
the psalmist honestly admits:
“I was unreasoning and lacked understanding.”
So, what would he do?
Could he ever be called understanding again?
Notice verse 15:
“But if I had said these things,
I would have betrayed your people.”
So first, the psalmist held back
from making his perplexing thoughts public.
He knew that that kind of negative speech
would affect God’s people.
He likened it to a betrayal,
as if he were releasing the names
of his fellow worshippers to the enemy.
That’s what he likened negative speech to.
Instead, he kept
to his spiritual routine and waited.
And then a powerful moment
took place in verse 26:
“My body and my heart may fail,
“but God is the rock of my heart
and my portion forever.”
There it is—understanding.
The psalmist knew he was not alone.
Jehovah God, the immovable Rock,
was keeping him stable
in the midst of this violent windstorm
that he found himself in.
That powerful realization plugged him back
into the Source of understanding,
and he was once again able
to put the facts together,
find good in a matter,
and speak and act kindly and positively.
What’s the lesson?
When we are in turmoil
and feel lacking in understanding,
we are in good company.
Many faithful servants of Jehovah
have felt this way.
When we do like the psalmist,
we hold back from negative speech,
which can affect those around us.
Instead, we speak privately
with a trusted friend,
we keep to our spiritual routine,
and we wait.
We wait for our powerful moment
—the realization that Jehovah God
is the Rock of our heart.
And one final point:
Demonstrating understanding
includes demonstrating it with ourself.
You will make mistakes, and when you do,
your trust in Jehovah
will allow you to find the good in yourself,
as Brother Sanderson mentioned
in the opening comments.
And that will help you
to keep a positive frame of mind.
Well, we know Jehovah God
is going to be with you in your assignments.
May your trust in him
—the Source of understanding—
continue to deepen.
This will allow you to address situations
by putting the facts together,
finding good in a matter,
and speaking and acting kindly,
positively, persuasively.
When you do this,
you’ll be showing that you are wise in heart
and you will be called understanding.